---
title: "Longevity and Why Robustness Fails"
date: 2021-04-26
categories:
  - blog
tags:
  - science
  - society
  - climate change
---

### A foil
<label for=zero class='margin-toggle'></label><input type='checkbox' id=zero class='margin-toggle'/><span class='marginnote'> Not [aluminum foil](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foil_(narrative)) </span>

In order to understand how humanity goes about extending the lifespan of the objects and systems it builds, we can start by examining how we try to extend our own lives. We have a pretty good sense of how long humans \"last\". Sure, there are plenty of missing details, but we know that humans live on average [~70 years](https://ourworldindata.org/life-expectancy). We also have a lot of data<label for=one class='margin-toggle sidenote-number'></label><input type='checkbox' id=one class='margin-toggle'/><span class='sidenote'>See [here](https://mortality.org/), [here](https://www.who.int/data/gho/data/themes/mortality-and-global-health-estimates), and [here](https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nvss/mortality_tables.htm)</span>
about how humans typically die and an [idea of the processes responsible](https://www.ldeming.com/longevityfaq/). Increasing longevity in humans is focused on applying medical treatments and socioeconomic policies since we can\'t<label for=two class='margin-toggle sidenote-number'></label><input type='checkbox' id=two class='margin-toggle'/><span class='sidenote'>And maybe don\'t want to</span> significantly re-engineer the human body. However, when we build things, we have much greater freedom in re-imagining the product to fit our (somewhat arbitrary) constraints<label for=three class='margin-toggle sidenote-number'></label><input type='checkbox' id=three class='margin-toggle'/><span class='sidenote'>So human longevity is really only revealing in contrast to engineering longevity in the things we build.</span>. In many of these cases, increasing longevity relies on adding features to protect the object\'s functions and designing the object to function redundantly so it is robust to failure of a single component. As we will see, the effectiveness of these measures is highly contingent on what disturbances the object might encounter during normal functioning.

### Robustness in Idealized Environments

Consider a computer: how long does a computer usually last?<label for=four class='margin-toggle sidenote-number'></label><input type='checkbox' id=four class='margin-toggle'/><span class='sidenote'>This is important to understand since computers run medical, energy, financial, and military systems so we can\'t have them failing willy-nilly and unexpectedly.</span> Some [quick](https://www.minitool.com/backup-tips/how-long-do-laptops-last.html) [searching](https://technicalexplore.com/how-long-do-laptops-last/) turns up a range of ~3-5 years for the \"standard\" laptop, with [some websites](https://dfarq.homeip.net/how-long-do-laptops-last/) claiming that they can last up to ~10 years. These are numbers are all cited anecdotally. This is ok for the average consumer, but what happens if we need to build a computer that lasts a long time?<label for=five class='margin-toggle sidenote-number'></label><input type='checkbox' id=five class='margin-toggle'/><span class='sidenote'>For example, if fixing it is impossible or cost-prohibitive</span> Failures in a complex assembly like a laptop or a human body are the results of random processes: variations in the quality of the components, the external stresses they face, and the interactions with other internal components all contribute. If we are focused on making a system last longer, often the best we can do is simply to make it redundant and to protect it as best as possible. In the case of computers, the cutting-edge is probably the [computers that NASA sends into space](https://mars.nasa.gov/mars2020/spacecraft/rover/brains/). These computers often have multiple interchangeable central computers and are specially treated to be more radiation resistant<label for=six class='margin-toggle sidenote-number'></label><input type='checkbox' id=six class='margin-toggle'/><span class='sidenote'>Without protection from the Earth's magnetic field, radiation significantly shortens a computer\'s lifespan in space.</span>. Other systems that are fixable, but can\'t suffer downtime, like digitized financial systems, also rely on redundancy and protection by running critical processes across a distributed network that is robust to failures of individual computers and by housing these computers in optimized server farms.

### Robustness in the Real World

However, other systems are not quite as easy to build robustly. Building many bridges to cross a river isn\'t robust in the same way that running software across many computers is; if even a single bridge collapses, people will die and repairs will likely take months. A crashed computer will only increase the processing load of the remaining computers temporarily and can be replaced in minutes or hours<label for=seven class='margin-toggle sidenote-number'></label><input type='checkbox' id=seven class='margin-toggle'/><span class='sidenote'>Though one can certainly imagine ways in which computers can fail more significantly</span>. There are tricks that make mechanical structures more robust through redundancy; multiple load-bearing columns can provide enough extra robustness to safely repair any compromised columns in a building. The two jet engines on passenger planes perform a similar function. But in physical structures, there is an implicit assumption of what is \"normal\"<label for=eight class='margin-toggle sidenote-number'></label><input type='checkbox' id=eight class='margin-toggle'/><span class='sidenote'>As digital actors, computers are less subject to unexpected events because software is a human creation; software doesn't accommodate the possibility of truly unknown events occurring in the same way that physical reality does.</span>. A plane with ten redundant engines will still not be safe if it flies into a hurricane, nor will a building with hundreds of columns if Godzilla takes a swipe at it.

### Hidden Assumptions

Building something that is impervious is impossible, because there is always some unknown event that can wipe out whatever we constructed. Nonetheless, humanity has been extremely successful using statistics to quantify what is \"normal\". This is evidenced by how many bridges and buildings _don\'t_ collapse. Eventually though, most bridges get old and need to be upgraded and replaced. There are few human creations that last for many centuries and continue functioning<label for=nine class='margin-toggle sidenote-number'></label><input type='checkbox' id=nine class='margin-toggle'/><span class='sidenote'>One important category is ideas and knowledge, which I won\'t be talking about here</span>. The only physical creations of ours that seem to last almost indefinitely are cities<label for=ten class='margin-toggle sidenote-number'></label><input type='checkbox' id=ten class='margin-toggle'/><span class='sidenote'>I can\'t seem to find a proper reference for this; but I remember reading or hearing this while in undergrad.</span>.

The resilience of cities is primarily due to the great redundancy they are granted by the many social and physical structures that comprise them<label for=eleven class='margin-toggle sidenote-number'></label><input type='checkbox' id=eleven class='margin-toggle'/><span class='sidenote'>See [here](https://www.reddit.com/r/AskHistorians/comments/7y7d0k/how_do_cities_die/) for an interesting discussion</span>. Yet the amazing thing is that<label for=twelve class='margin-toggle sidenote-number'></label><input type='checkbox' id=twelve class='margin-toggle'/><span class='sidenote'>Perhaps since the patterns of resource flows in human society\'s is stunningly constant</span>, that even when cities \"die\" and shrink their populations by orders of magnitude they very frequently recover. London after the fall of the Roman Empire was almost deserted, and is now a thriving global metropolis. The 1906 San Francisco Earthquake, 1871 Chicago Fire, and the bombings of Hiroshima, Dresden and Warsaw are all examples of colossal catastrophes that each of the cities recovered from. It takes more than a single localized disturbance to end a city. As cited in the Reddit post linked above, \"Burn down your cities and leave our farms, and your cities will spring up again as if by magic. But destroy our farms and the grass will grow in the streets of every city in the country.\"<label for=thirteen class='margin-toggle sidenote-number'></label><input type='checkbox' id=thirteen class='margin-toggle'/><span class='sidenote'>Originally from William J Bryant\'s [\'Cross of Gold\' speech](http://historymatters.gmu.edu/d/5354/)</span> The scale of development that humanity has undertaken over its history ensures that when even when most cities are leveled, the surrounding infrastructure enables them to spring back.

Revival is possible because the catastrophes are temporary and after a temporary departure from \"normal\", everything returns to normal. This assumption of normality will not hold as climate change progresses. From server farms to bridges to cities, climate change upends all of our assumptions about what is \"normal\" and diminishes the usefulness of all of our historical knowledge; the future will not be like the past. In 2018, Cape Town nearly [ran out of water](http://www.capetowndrought.com/) and this is likely to recur as climate change progresses.

### Parting Thoughts

Humanity has gotten quite good at building robustly since we know what to expect. As we continue building, we _must_ take our changing environment into account and rethink what it is necessary for robustness, otherwise our normally robust systems will constantly fail.
